in the Middle East US Secretary of State
Anthony blinkin is keeping up his push
for a ceasefire deal between Israel and
Hamas but serious obstacles remain on
Tuesday blinkin held talks in Egypt on
the proposed truce before traveling to
Qatar both countries along with the US
are acting as mediators on Monday
blinkin told journalists in Tel Aviv
that Israel had accepted what he called
a bridging proposal designed to address
the differences between the two sides
but Hamas the militant group that
committed the October 7th Terror attacks
says that proposal goes against what it
had previously agreed to bringing Laura
Blumenfeld she's a bestselling author
and Middle East Analyst at John's
Hopkins University Laura welcome back to
the day now you served in the US state
department as senior policy adviser for
the peace process in the Middle East
what would be your advice for Anthony
blinkin today as he's in the region
trying to broker a ceasefire
deal well I would say there are the
ceasefire 3ts from success um number one
timing number two trust and number three
tough an ability to get tough um first
of all with the timing I mean I was I
happened to be in Secretary Ker's office
uh in
2014 uh during during a Gaza War when
the Israeli tanks just rolled over the
border into Gaza and his first instinct
secretary Kerry was let's go for a
ceasefire um the truth was then and
perhaps now is that neither side was
ready for that and as much as we pushed
and TR red Not only was Israel not want
ready to lay down their arms but Egypt
as well that was helping broker in 2014
you know felt like that there needed to
be a little bit more of fighting before
we could reach that ceasefire so number
one timing um the second thing is trust
uh secretary Kissinger uh said one time
that trust is the currency of diplomacy
there's very little trust right now um
we're seeing actually a degradation of
that unfortunately we're going in the
wrong directions uh Hamas today said
that they are you know increasingly
suspicious of the United States that
America is siding too much on the
Israeli side so unfortunately that's
that's not looking good the third thing
is tough an ability to sort of get tough
um depending on you know which party is
the recalcitrant one um mateline alright
a former secretary of state was very
good about being tough in terms of
keeping the negotiations quiet and
private I think one of the problems
we're seeing today is it's all being
played out in public and with all the
leaks in the media um that makes it very
very hard for the negotiators and the
parties to make concessions and save
face secretary Albright used to say to
the Press when they would ask her about
negotiations with Syria and Israel she
would say mushrooms and what she meant
by mushrooms was that negotiations
especially when it comes to treaties are
just like mushrooms they do better in
the dark it it's from what we know and
and from what you're saying it seems
like we know a lot of what is being
talked about there it does seem like
like it's one step forward and one back
when Israel is on board Hamas is not and
vice versa is that really so or is there
progress being made that maybe isn't
being conveyed as
such well there is progress the problem
is those last few percentages or yards
if you want to use the football analogy
that the Americans have been using are
always the hardest right that's always
those final details sometimes are the
stickiest and they can actually stick so
hard that it blows up a deal again that
happened to us in 2014 um we hit a kind
of detail about a prisoner release
actually and the sides couldn't agree on
it and that then we were you know the
whole thing unraveled and few months
later we there was a war um I I think
right now what we're seeing is a kind of
diplomatic holding pattern you know
we're circling uh are we going to run
out of fuel Hamas is accusing the
Americans of of playing for time um and
then the question is can we land the
deal before the really big uh problem
comes about which is uh Iran and
Hezbollah are poised to retaliate
against Israel which hopefully in the
bestc scenario will motivate the sides
and mo to compromise rather than lead to
a you know Regional configration which
is our number one priority from the
beginning of this uh you know terrible
10 months for the United States number
one priority has been avoiding Regional
escalation yeah and I'm glad you mention
Iran
because there's a lot to unpack here
ceasefire was build by many as a way of
keeping Teran at Bay when it comes to
avenging the killing of Hamas political
chief on its soil but an Iranian foreign
minister a foreign Ministry spokesman
gave an interesting statement in that
regard let's quickly listen in and then
get back to
you the issue of the Gaza ceasefire has
nothing to do with Iran's legitimate and
legal right to punish the
aggressor and it will not relate
directly to it
we are not looking for intensification
of insecurity in the region we support
efforts with good intentions regarding
the
ceasefire Laura what do you make of that
statement well I think it's important
for Iran to put that statement forward
because the West is telling them to
stand down but they still have the need
to save face Iran is playing a long game
here um they're absolutely right when
they say one thing isn't connect to the
other I mean there's a clock in
Palestine Square in tahon which is
ticking down backward it's a Doomsday
Clock for Israel that by 2040 Iran will
eliminate the state the state of Israel
so you have to understand in the larger
context of what their goals are it's
also important to understand the weapons
that the United States has poised
whether it's at Iran's proxies or
whether it's at you know the regime
itself whether it's the supreme leader
is the gun pointed at his head or is
that is that their proxies I think that
could make a big difference if they
understood whether the American
Firepower that they're rushing to the
region whether it's the battleships or
the fighter jets is that aimed at Iran
what is the US Iran policy here I think
that there's been a lot of discussion of
that is it tough enough um is it too
tough you know we're we're we're in the
middle of a presidential race so it's
kind of a hard time to start debating
foreign policy and acting on it but I
think that really goes to the core of
the issue here you know where is the
United States with Iran and that's what
Netanyahu was arguing for when he spoke
in front of Congress several weeks ago
he said to the American people and
Congress our fight is your fight the
question is is it really yeah um I want
to pick up on something that Anthony
blinkin said when he arrived in Israel
on Monday he said this was the best and
perhaps the last chance to get a deal
over the line what happens if that
doesn't
happen well I think it was very
interesting and thank you for quoting
that because he was hedging right he
said maybe the best and perhaps the last
um Israel's uh prime minister Yak Shamir
said years ago never give yourself an
ultimatum because you box yourself in
right Americans are always the optimists
um and so there's there will be another
time and another time the reason why
this is very different though again is
because nothing quite focuses the mind
like a gun to your head and Israel truly
does have a gun to its head right now um
you know with this potential twin
assassinations um that they that they
conducted in the past few weeks with the
potential retaliation for that both
coming from the north and from the east
from Iran so it is a little bit
different the stakes are much higher and
and sometimes when the stakes are so
high you know you can say it's too big
to fail this
diplomacy watch the skies is what I
would say look the the lights are going
down the Sun is setting over the Middle
East now watch the skies not only for
whether there'll be rockets and
increased uh you know drone strikes but
also for the aircraft I mean for the
first time since October fly Dubai the
Emirates Airline is grounding their
aircraft at night that does give me some
concern that's Laura Blumenfeld author
and Middle East analyst thank you so
much for all those fascinating insights
it's always great speaking to you